Praised be Jesus and Mary!
Brothers and sisters in Christ.
I am a little bit jealous of you.
Do you know why?
Even though you are young,
you've come to the faith, relatively fast.
I had to suffer a bit.
However, everyone has their own path.
I'll tell you my life story,
which consists of two parts.
The first part was
without God.
The second part is
with God.
Which part is better,
you'll see for yourself.
As you know, my name
is Goran. I was born in Split
in a Catholic family,
but there was no prayer
or faith in my family,
neither did we go to church.
My parents would tell me
that I must go to church.
I did not want to go,
because I followed their example.
I would tell them, if you don't
attend church, why should I?
My father was a difficult man and
he made me attend religion classes.
To me, church was boring.
When you read the Ten Commandments,
what is interesting about them?
You are told not to steal, not to lie,
not to date someone else's wife.
Man, they forbid you to do anything.
What kind of a life is that?
That's the life for an old
grandmother, who is waiting to die,
and all she has left is prayer.
I was sure that I received nothing from church.
When my sister was four years old
she fell from the fifth floor.
She died at my mother's feet.
When my brother was one year old,
he got meningitis and as a result,
he remained deaf and mute.
My mother was constantly
crying and depressive.
At home there was no God,
so my mother started to drink alcohol.
The poor lady, she thought that
with alcohol, she'd get rid of
the pain she carried in her heart.
My father, who was a seaman,
spent more time at sea than at home.
From a young age, I was either on
the street or in front of the television.
I liked to watch American action movies.
Those actors were my idols.
They were full of tattoos, they had big
muscles, they were in and out of prisons,
they had beautiful women,
great cars, and a lot of money.
They smoked, and drank
whiskey, man they were cool!
I created a picture in my mind that
a man had to be like those actors.
When I was ten years old, I started
smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol.
When I was eleven years old, I was
sure I knew everything about life.
I had enough of school, because all
they ever did, was tell me what to do
and how to behave.
I had had enough of that,
I thought I was old enough to live alone,
so I ran away from home
and went to another city.
I robbed a store. The police
caught me and locked me up
and obviously, they immediately
called my father and told him
to come and pick
me up the following day.
My father left me with
the police for three days.
His reasoning was logical: leave him
there a few days longer, so that he
gets scared and changes.
The relationship between my father and I,
to be honest, couldn't be called a relationship.
My father was a good man,
however he had a problem.
He didn't know how to communicate.
In our home, there were no conversations.
My whole upbringing
consisted of him beating me.
I am ashamed to even mention
how much he beat me.
He beat me like an ox, because he
thought that beatings would solve
my problems.
When he came to get me at the
police station after three days,
he didn't ask me anything.
He immediately began to
beat me in the police station,
to the point where the police
had to protect me from him.
Afterwards, he beat me in the bus
for another two and a half hours.
When I was thirteen years old,
my mother passed away.
After her death I fell into a depression,
because I had never hugged my mother,
kissed her or told her that I loved her.
I wanted to make those
loving gestures towards her,
but I couldn't because I was a man.
Men don't show their emotions.
Men have to be cold; women are
the ones who show their emotions.
This really hurt me and
I decided that I would kill myself.
Eight months after my mother
died, my father remarried.
Now for the first time, I felt hatred within me
and hatred towards my father.
I could not understand how
after only eight months, he could
have forgotten his wife, my mother.
I hated my brother,
who was indifferent. At least
that's what I thought.
He was also an alcoholic.
I hated that woman who came into
our house, pretending to be my mother.
June 2nd, 1978.
It was the first-year anniversary
of my mother's death.
I borrowed a gun from a friend. I came home,
my father was watching football (soccer).
It was the world cup in Argentina.
I sat near him wanting to talk,
but he was totally nervous. He turned
towards me, hit me and yelled at me
me to go to my room.
I went to my room, took the gun, pointed
it at my head and pulled the trigger.
I woke up in the hospital and overheard
a doctor speaking to someone,
saying: ...
'the operation failed. The bullet is in
his head, it cannot be removed,
and he won't live a long life, he will
have lots of problems with his head.'
A few days later, my father and
stepmother came to the hospital
and they told me that everything was
fine and that the bullet had been removed.
I fell into an even deeper depression,
because I hadn't killed myself.
When I came out of the hospital,
I immediately went to alcohol
and started consuming pills.
I always hung around older people,
because I felt older.
All my friends had been smoking
marihuana and hashish for a long time.
Every day they would tell me:
'Goran, you're not normal.
You should start smoking marihuana.
Marihuana is a natural plant. When you
smoke it, it's good for your health,
it develops your brain, you sleep better,
eat better, you're not agressive,
you have no problems, you just laugh.
There's no withdrawal, no addiction.’
I started to think that maybe
it wasn't so dangerous.
I tried it and then for the following
ten days I didn't smoke any.
During those ten days I thought to myself:
'You're a guy with character,
for ten days you didn't have a need to
light up a joint, everyone is lying,
marihuana is good.'
After ten days, I lit another joint
and just like that the day came when
I would smoke it from morning until night
every day.
However, what happened was
that one day I woke
up in the hospital.
My head was injured and blooded...
the doctors did some
tests and diagnosed me
with epilepsy.
When I developed that disorder,
I fell into an even deeper depression
because I was embarrassed.
I knew I had to change my life,
but how?
My father was always at sea working,
my brother was drunk every day.
My stepmother was afraid of me.
I was agressive and I directed
all the blame towards her.
Thank God for my friends
who talked me
into trying heroin.
They told me: 'Goran, you'll solve
all your problems with heroin.'
I was convinced that my
life couldn't get any worse.
One day I told myself: 'Let me try heroin,
maybe things will be better'.
At the moment when you try heroin,
the feeling that comes
into your head is great.
At the beginning it was good.
A little money and a little heroin.
As time went by, every
day I needed more money.
I started stealing cars, breaking into homes,
apartments, restaurants, stealing wallets.
I started doing things which
I was sure I would never do.
Can you imagine the paradox.
My poor father worked his whole life
and brought home money and material goods.
In one month, I stole and
sold everything he owned.
He was overcome by panic.
One day he called me crying: 'Goran, my son
you have a big problem.
Please, let's talk about getting you help.'
I looked at him
and said: 'Are you normal?!
Now you want to sit and talk.
I've been waiting for you to talk
with me for twenty years,
and now it's too late.'
That was in the eighties,
during communism.
There were no counseling centers, no rehab
communities. There wasn't anything.
My father didn't know where to look for help,
so he went to the police.
One morning,
policemen entered my room,
brought heroin and threw it near my head
and accused me of being a dealer.
'Now we're going to lock you up'.
Their reasoning was logical:
if they lock me up for five, six months,
perhaps I'll see that I am on the wrong path.
Maybe I'll change.
However, what happened
in jail was the opposite.
I learned how to steal better,
how to mix drugs better
to increase its quantity.
When I got out of prison, I left
smarter than when I went in.
In prison there's just as many drugs,
alcohol, and pills, as on the outside.
Being in prison made
me a hundred times worse,
so my life agony continued.
My father was searching for help everywhere.
One day a friend of my
father's told him: 'Marko,
your son Goran is a sick boy.
When someone is sick,
they go to the doctor.
You need to lock Goran up
in a psychiatric institution.
Psychiatrists are smart,
highly educated people.
Nobody will be able to
help him, other than a doctor.’
My whole family was happy
and started to pressure me to
go to a psychiatric institution.
I didn't want to go,
but I had problems with the courts,
as well as the police.
So finally, I had to go.
Two days before I was to go,
I organized everything.
In Split, the psychiatric institution
is on the ground floor.
I had a bed
and all day I would watch TV
and joke with the other patients.
The doctors gave me pills,
my friends would come
every day and through
my window, they'd throw
me drugs and alcohol.
It was great, like a vacation.
One night my friends came, and I escaped
in my pajamas, to a discotheque.
Here, it was written 'Psychiatry'.
There I danced, drank sang
The police arrived and gave me a beating.
They returned me to the hospital and
the doctors went crazy, they didn't know
what to do with me, because
I disturbed everything there.
In the end, of course, they threw me out.
I got another chance outside,
but it was even worse.
At home, the police and the ambulance
were visiting my house every day.
We were fighting, my brother
was drunk, it was hell.
One day, another one of my
father's friends told him:
'Marko,
I have been thinking about your
problem with your son, for a long time.
You need to find Goran a job.'
Again, logical reasoning, they thought:
'Goran will have to wake
up early every morning
and work for eight hours'.
'He'll get tired and when he's tired,
he'll have no time for stupidities.
He'll be with normal people. Step
by step, he'll have to change.'
Everyone was happy,
except for me, of course.
They started pressuring me to go to work.
However, I didn't want to do that,
stealing was easier for me.
When everyone saw that I refused,
all my relatives got together and told me:
'Listen,
either you go to work or you're on the street!'.
I had to choose.
When it came time to choose between the
two evils, I chose the lesser of the two.
I went to work.
My father found me a job in
the company where he worked.
It was a warehouse
where they had all kinds of
products for seamen and boats.
All my father's friends worked there
and they told him: 'Marko don't
worry about anything.
You just bring Goran.
We'll take care of him. We'll even
give him a beating if necessary.
We'll give him so much work
that it'll come out of his ears.
I started to work;
however it became apparent that
it was the biggest mistake
my father could have made.
I stole half the warehouse and
sold everything that could
be sold. I also borrowed money
from co-workers and never
paid anyone back.
One day, I got angry at the manager
and chased him with a knife
round the warehouse.
They saw that I was a complete idiot
and they fired me.
That was the end of that.
One day I came home
drunk and on a downer.
I asked my father for money
and he got angry and hit me.
We started fighting.
My father weighed 120 kg.
I realized that my father was going
to give me a good beating, so I grabbed
a knife and stabbed him in the stomach.
My father ended up in the
hospital and I ended up in jail.
I was angry
because it was his fault.
If he had only given me money, I would
have taken drugs, and nothing would
have happened.
As soon as I got out of jail, without even
a little remorse, I wanted to return home
like nothing had ever happened.
Today, when I think about it, the worst
thing that could happen to someone
is for them to lose their
conscience, as I did then.
I came home, but the door was locked.
Behind the door my father said:
'Listen son.
Between your family and the
street, you chose the street.
Live on the streets with your friends.
If one day you decide to change your life,
come back and we'll help you.'
At that moment the hatred
I had for my family
increased a million times,
because I couldn't come to understand
how they dared to throw me out of the house.
I spat on the door and started to swear:
'I'm leaving and you'll never see me again.'
For nine years, after that day,
I lived on the streets like a bum.
Those nine years were a disaster.
When you have money, when you
have drugs, you have friends.
I came to the point where even if
I had money and drugs, nobody
wanted to be around me.
I looked so ugly and behaved so abnormally.
In the latter part of my life on the streets,
an irrational fear began to grow inside me,
which I cannot even describe to you.
Those fears drove me crazy,
I feared everything.
In those moments, not one drug, or
one pill, could have calmed me down.
The only thing that calmed
me down, was my blood.
I would cut myself and with an empty
syringe I would draw my blood out,
and then drink it and
rub it all over myself.
That would give me some kind of peace.
The last time they locked me up,
they saw that I wasn't normal, so
they brought me a neuropsychiatrist,
who diagnosed me as a: schizophrenic
and I ended up in a mental institution
in Popovača.
When I came there, I immediately
received treatment for my disorder,
and I calmed down.
One morning,
I was sitting at a table in the ward
and I asked myself, what am I doing here?
I was a common drug addict
placed in a ward full of murderers.
Why?
While in the Remetinec jail, I was waiting
transport to the mental institution,
this was right at the start
of the Homeland War,
and the authorities had their hands
full with many problems, nevertheless,
I ended up back in the psych
ward with two other guys.
'My God, I can't stay here.
They'll kill me within two days.
I have to escape'.
So then I analyzed the situation.
An opportunity presented itself,
I stole money from a fellow
patient and escaped.
Obviously, I considered myself smart
and I had devised a plan in my head.
I would return to Split,
take drugs, go fight in the war, Croatia
would win the war and there would
be a change in government.
And I would be a free man.
So simple.
I'm smart.
I returned to Split, took some drugs and
one morning I went to the military barracks.
I went inside and two
soldiers looked at me.
One said to me:
'Where do you think you're going?'
So I replied: 'What do you mean,
where am I going? I'm Croatian,
I'm going to fight and defend my country.'
The other soldier then said to me:
'Please turn around and get
out of here, if not I'll break your legs.'
Now you all see me tonight at 90 kg,
but back then I didn't even weigh 60 kg,
all skin and bones,
and if they would have
given me a Kalashnikov,
I would have definitely sold it at the first
street corner or exchanged it for some heroin.
I'm sure I wasn't the first drug
addict to have visited that barrack.
I continued with my life.
The police had issued an arrest
warrant for me and they caught me.
They put me in their van
and brought me back
to the mental institution.
There were two technicians, which
I will never forget,
because they beat me like an ox.
They restrained me,
laid me on a bed and tied
my legs to the bed posts.
I was tied up like a Zagreb salami
and they put me in the room of the
patient, from whom I had stolen money...
and he had murdered four people.
They had intentionally done
that as a punishment.
I had stolen his money, because I was smart
and I was sure I would never return there.
Everything had been planned.
I laid tied to my bed.
He sat on his bed across from
me, and this went on for five days.
That murderer sat on his bed, smoked
cigarettes, and looked at me in the eyes.
For five days, and he didn't
speak one single word to me.
He just stared at me and
that mentally, was killing me.
When someone doesn't speak, you
don't know what they're thinking.
Every time he got up from his bed,
my eyes would turn over, because
I thought he was going to kill me.
You can all laugh now, but it
wasn't so funny to me then.
The fifth day, he looked at me
and he spoke to me:
'Listen you little sh*t
do you know who I am?
do you know what I have done?
And what I could do to you?
I've been thinking for five days whether
I should strangle you like a rabbit or not.
However, when I think about it a little better,
you were brave enough to steal my money.
Well done!'
It was the nicest moment of my life.
Later on, he became my friend.
Drago was a good guy.
I could write a whole book about
that Popovača mental institution.
Over there, everything functioned
when they had medication,
but often there was no medication,
they would give us replacement drugs,
which wasn't often,
so it was a circus.
The main doctor,
primarius Milivoj Koludrović
called me into his office
and told me: 'Goran, tomorrow
you will be released.
You make one more wrong move,
and I will personally bring you back here.
You'll never get out again.
You will die here.
I promise you that, and now think about
what you're going to do with your life.'
I thought to myself:
'My God, this guy is not normal!'
He never forgave me
for escaping his institution.
He always made problems for me.
I didn't have the courage, or the
will to return there ever again.
I thought about what I would do now
and it came to me
You idiot, you have to change your life.
Change your life and everything will be fine.
So I decided to return
to Split and the first door
which I knocked on, was that of my dealer.
I took some heroin. The next
afternoon, I continued my old ways,
but as time went on I couldn't sleep anymore
I would carry the same sandwich
in my pocket for twenty days.
That was all the food I had.
I was full of open wounds.
You cannot imagine the stench
and smell coming from me,
or that a human could even smell like that.
When I would get on the city bus,
everyone would run out at the next stop,
so I always had a place to sit, because
everyone would run away from me.
How many times I would sit like
this, against a wall, bunched up.
People would pass by me and spit on me.
They would beat me with their fists
and legs, they would shout that
should be killed, because I was
poison for their children.
It was all the same to me.
I was just waiting for the
moment when I would die.
For me, death was my salvation.
Life for me was only suffering.
Often, I would drink a bottle
of vodka, swallow a box of pills
and I would inject myself with heroin
I would be in a coma for a few days,
but I would always wake up.
Once I woke up, and it was summer.
My mouth was full of flies and ants.
I was given advice
on how to cut my veins.
My dear friends, veins are not cut like this,
they are supposed to be cut
lengthwise, then you have to die.
I'm not sure if you remember
those old razors from the old days.
It doesn't matter. One day I found
one of those razors on the ground.
I took it, and when I took a closer look at it,
it was rusted and dirty.
Then I was afraid of getting an infection
because you have to think of your health.
If I'm already going to die, I going
to die healthy, not sick.
Makes sense right?
I looked at it like this and said:
'Oh my God, I need to disinfect it.'
I disinfected it.
I was sitting on a bench and
did this. Let me show you
I put my left arm tightly between my knees,
jabbed the razor into my skin and dragged it.
Then a large hole opened up in
my arm, which I could have
put my whole fist into.
Blood was flowing the whole time
and I started to become dizzy.
The only thought I had was:
„Thank you Jesus! It's over.“
Then I fainted.
I woke up in a hospital.
How pathetic, I couldn't even kill myself.
One night
in February,
I was in a partially demolished house,
sitting like a dog on a piece of carton,
a small candle lit.
At one point
I started thinking
about my family, my childhood.
The more I thought about it,
the more pain I felt in my chest.
I finally concluded
that nobody was to blame.
I was to blame for everything
that had happened in my life.
My whole life I had blamed other people,
especially my family,
to justify the evil I was doing.
When I realized that I was an idiot
that ruined his own life,
I started crying and praying the Hail Mary.
I felt hatred towards Jesus, Mary,
the Church, priests and believers like you.
This type of hatred you cannot even imagine.
The Hail Mary prayer stayed in my mind
from the time when I was young
and my parents forced me
to attend religion classes.
I was suprised that I only
remembered the Hail Mary.
All night I cried and
prayed saying: „Our Lady,
please take me up to you or give
me your hand to help me change my life
I'm tired of everything, do what you
want with me, but I can't do this anymore.
I spent all night like that.
A few days later, I was
sitting on a park bench,
early in the morning, it was cold.
Alone like a dog.
Suddenly, a lady walked into the park.
It was very odd that some woman
would come into this park.
I was looking at her
and she was staring back.
I kept thinking, I hope she's
not coming towards me.
Of course, that wasn't Our Lady.
Don't think that I saw Her.
She walked in front of me
and said
good morning
she said: 'I have a problem.
Can you please help me?'.
When she said that she had a
problem, I thought I'd go crazy.
Woman, do you know how
many problems I have?!
Who was going to help me?
Woman, get lost, and take
your problems with you,
I don't care for you or your problem.
She got a little scared
and said: 'Don't...please. I'm looking
for a young man, they call him Ćuke'.
That was me,
but I didn’t know who she was,
or what I could have done.
I was thinking about telling her that it
has me, but maybe she'll start yelling,
people will come and
they will call the police
they'll lock me up again.
On the other hand, I was curious.
I was in an odd situation,
so I looked around and there
wasn't anybody nearby.
I told her that I was Ćuke.
She lifted her head and said: “Thank
you Mother Mary for helping me find him.”
And I was thinking this lady is insane.
She took me under the arm
and said: 'please, let's take a walk'.
With all that was going on in my life,
as if I had nothing better to do, but to
take a walk with some
old lady around the park.
However, it came to me: 'Shut up
you idiot, she needs you'.
Since she needs you, you're
going to ask her money and
he is going to give it to you
and that was the only reason
I agreed to go with her
and she gave me money
and then she started
her story.
She said she was the mother of
a drug addict who ended up in jail.
That woman with the help of the courts
made an agreement that her son
will serve out his sentence in the
Cenacolo Drug Rehabilitation Community.
She then asked her son if he had a
friend that he wanted her to help,
and he named me.
But that made no sense,
because that young man was 10
years younger than me.
The only thing we had in common was that
we took heroin together twice, in a woodshed.
That was all. There was no logic to it.
That is the way this woman found me.
In a relatively short time, she had an ID card
and a citizenship document made for me,
because I had no official documents.
She took me to a bus station in Split
and bought me a bus ticket.
She didn''t say anything.
I looked at her and asked:
'Wait, where am I going?'
New Caption
Where am I going? What is that?
Then she started to explain to me:
'Goran,
Medjugorje is a small place
in Bosnia and Hercegovina.
The Virgin Mary appears there.
The Virgin Mary is waiting for you.
She loves you and is going to help you.
You have nothing to worry about.'
I looked at her thinking:
'I am a schizophrenic, but this woman
is a hundred times crazier than me.'
Looking at the bus ticket,
I thought:
Sleep on the streets of Split
or the streets in Medjugorje,
it was all the same to me.
Back then there was no highway.
The distance was 150 kilometers.
It wasn't far
and the trip was free.
I was a bum, I could sleep anywhere.
I went on this excursion.
I came to Medjugorje and as
soon as I came off the bus,
I went to the nearest store.
I stole two liters of wine and drank it.
I walked around the place.
After some time, I came in
front of a gate that read:
„Communitta Cenacolo“
Then I remembered that the woman,
Mrs. Dijana, talked about some community.
I looked inside and a few guys
saw me. We started talking
and of course, when they saw this
„beauty “, they couldn't resist me.
They took me in immediately,
which was a miracle, since no one
has ever been admitted into that
community high on drugs or in a
drunken state, as I was at that moment.
I got in right away and I had no idea why.
The first month of withdrawal,
that was the worst period of my life.
There were no pills, no alcohol,
no cigarettes, no newspapers,
no television, just hard work, and prayer.
If I didn't die then, I wasn't going to.
No one ever died from withdrawal
and neither did I, as you can all see.
The clothes they removed from me,
couldn't be washed.
They had to burn them.
When Sister Elvira saw how
many open wounds I had,
she was afraid I was in
the final stages of AIDS.
They immediately had me tested.
Thank God I didn't have AIDS.
As time went by, the withdrawal passed.
Little by little I was recovering.
The first thing that got on my nerves,
was that the guys in the community
prayed three rosaries a day.
I thought: You guys aren't normal;
I'm not going to be a priest.
I don't have a problem with prayer,
I have a problem with drugs, alcohol,
and pills. What does prayer have
to do with those issues?
One guy asked me:
'Are you going to pray or not?'
I couldn't be rude, because
they accepted me right away.
So I thought: one rosary,
15-20 minutes. I could handle that.
'Alright, I'll do one, but not three'.
So the guys said: 'Good, you pray one,
and the other two we'll pray for you.'
I responded: 'Great guys, thanks!
It's important to pray for others'.
My whole life was logical, hence
why I ended up where I was.
Now I'll tell you something I haven't
spoken about, for at least ten years.
Summer came.
The main guy in charge came to
me and handed me a heavy hammer.
What is it called?
Those 12 kg hammers.
A sledgehammer!
In Medjugorje, in the summer it
reaches 40-45 degrees Celsius.
And this guy tells me: 'You're
going to the quarry to pound rocks.'
' I replied: 'Not a chance.
Do you see this hot sun?'
'I won't ruin my health'.
and he says: 'You're in a work
group and you have to pound rock.'
I told him: 'My friend, thanks,
but that, I won't do.'
He just looked at me and said:
'You won't?' I said: 'I will not.'
He said: 'Fine, take a chair and sit there.'
Another guy comes to me and says:
'If you won't work,
we'll work for you.'
I replied: 'so work if you are fools.'
It was 50°C and they were
in a hole, pounding rock.
There were shards flying from
the rocks, like shrapnel from a grenade.
They were getting cut all over
and they were full of blood.
I was sitting in the
shade on a plastic chair.
I sat there comfortably and thought:
'My God, they are insane working,
this is like a concentration camp,
how could they work in there?'
After a few days,
something strange
started to happen in me.
Those guys in the hole
were pounding rock,
they were working hard,
but everyone was happy.
Everyone was telling jokes, they
were laughing, having a great time.
I wasn't doing anything, just sitting
on a chair in the shade
and I was angry, nervous, jealous.
All the evil was on me.
Then the time came when I said:
man, who's crazy here?
Either those guys who
are working in the hole,
or me who isn't doing anything.
Then I realized
that I
was the fool,
because for the first
time in my life, I saw
somebody doing something
unconditionally for me,
and I realized those actions
spoke stronger than words.
So I started to be embarassed watching
them work and fill trucks with rock.
So I got up and went to work.
Man, my life turned around just like that.
By now, I was in the
community for eleven months,
and I started to feel a lot of jealousy,
which turned into hatred
towards the other guys because
they had family visiting them.
Nobody came to visit me.
Ten years had passed since
the last contact with my family.
Nine years on the streets and
one year in the rehab community.
Daily prayer
made me outwardly conscious
and I started to regret
everything I had done.
At that point in my life, I would have
liked to make peace with my family
and with my father. But how?
I wanted to write a letter,
but the guys told me that I couldn't
and that I had to make penance.
Without penance, there is no
love and there is no fruit.
So for penance, they told me to
wake up at 2 a.m every day, and
go to the chapel for an hour of prayer,
on my knees and with faith and conviction.
They said everything would then be fine.
But I thought: Who's going
to wake up at 2 a.m?
Couldn't they think of anything easier?
As time went on nothing was happening.
I had a big desire to make
peace with my family.
I started waking up at 2 a.m,
I started praying.
I was sure that I'd die before my
father would make peace with me.
Not even
a month passed,
when one guy said to me: 'Come with
me Goran, some pilgrims came from Croatia,
please show them around
our rehab community.'
I came there, opened the
dining room doors to the pilgrims,
and when I lifted my head
the first face that I saw,
was that of my father.
That was the hardest moment of my life.
That feeling of embarrassment, and guilt.
I cannot describe that feeling to you.
I remained frozen, with my head down.
I didn't have the courage to look at
him again, from the
embarrassment I felt.
Poor him, he saw
how difficult it was for me.
He came to me, hugged me,
and started crying.
Then I hugged him
back and started crying.
The whole day, we just cried
together. We didn't speak.
I didn't even know what to say to him.
Do I tell him that I'll be good?
I didn't even have the strength
to ask for his forgiveness,
because I couldn't promise
him that I would remain sober.
My whole life, I lied.
For the first time, I wanted to be
honest towards him and I didn't
want to give him false hope.
The only thing I told him when
he was leaving, was:
'Listen.
I destroyed myself and you.
So I told him: 'Maybe tomorrow
something will trigger me, in this
crazy head of mine, to go
back to my old ways,
but in order to avoid this from happening,
can you do something for me?
I am requesting, if you want,
when you return home,
that you ask your wife,
for both of you to start praying
for my conversion?'
'Son, what do you think? We have been
praying for you for many years now.'
Today, looking back,
everything in my life
had to be the way it was,
so that all that hardship would return
my family to prayer and faith.
Each one of us had
his way of the Cross,
so that God could show us
that we had to return to Church.
All the suffering, all the pain of each
one of us, made sense with God.
That is how I think about it.
That encounter with my father
gave me an even bigger desire
and hope that I will convert,
and gave me strenght to continue
in the community, to change.
After spending fours years in the community,
I had a desire to leave it.
I didn't want to return
to my old life in Split,
since I felt reborn in Medjugorje.
But there was a problem, nobody
wanted to give me a job,
nobody trusted me.
What would I do without a job?
Start stealing again? Not a chance.
I wanted to live honestly, like other
people, but how without a job?
I started praying even more
and Our Lady solved everything.
I was good friends with the now
deceased Father Slavko Barbarić,
a franciscan priest who was
a legend in Medjugorje.
He died up on Križevac mountain.
He would come to our community
to hear our confessions,
or Eucharistic adoration and
to celebrate Mass every day
I was really good with him.
I told him: 'Father,
I don't want to be in this rehab
community for the rest of my life
and I don't want to return to Split.
I want to start my life
over from here, from zero.
I would like to live here with Our Lady,
but nobody trusts me.
I can't find a job. Please help me find
something, so that I can start living
normal life, like other people.'
He looked at me like
this and said: 'Goran,
I've been observing you for a while.
I see that you're a good guy, so
I'll find you something,
but you have to be patient.'
Not even twenty days passed,
when Father Slavko came to
my rehab center and told me: 'Goran,
listen, I have good news for you.
I have a job for you.
Don't dare to disappoint me,
because I found you a great job.
Goran, believe me,
I'll make you a Director.'
I thought to myself: Man, it was worth
taking drugs, I'll be a Director.
If I had not taken drugs, I would have
never become a Director.
We spoke a little while,
then he left, and I was alone
and I thought to myself.
How will I be a Director
without an education,
I'm a common ex-drug addict.
But a priest wouldn't lie, nobody
should, but especially not a priest.
I didn't understand what was going on,
so I went to the parish office
and found Father Slavko and asked him:
'What will I be doing as a job?'.
He said to me:
'You're going to clean toilets, what
did you think you'd be doing?'.
I thought to myself: My Lord, I'm going
to be the toilet cleaning Director!
For those that have been to Medugorje,
New Caption
Men and women's stalls, urinals, what
can I tell you, work up till here.
It was great for me. I cleaned, washed,
sang, prayed, got to know people.
In the washrooms it's always very lively.
It was good.
It was great.
Meanwhile,
time was passing.
Every day I became more
and more nervous,
because I was working every day,
including Saturdays and
Sundays, along with holidays.
Every morning I would start at 7 a.m
and I would finish at 11 p.m.
Therefore, I didn't have a free minute.
Nuns would bring me breakfast,
lunch, and supper to my toilet workplace.
My God...
Don't get me wrong, I'm not complaining,
because on one hand
it was good,
I was getting paid, and I didn't have
time to spend my money.
I would put all my money aside.
I didn't pay for the washroom, because
I was the director and obviously,
directors must have some privileges.
On one hand it was good,
however, on the other hand,
what bothered me
was that I wanted to find a girlfriend.
How will I find a girlfriend when
I spend all day in the washroom.
This meant that the only option I had left,
was to search for the love of my life
in a public washroom.
You all laugh, just laugh.
You must understand,
there are two entrances,
for ladies
and for gentlemen.
At that time, when I was the director
the entrance for the women didn't exist.
Only the men's entrance existed.
Everyone would enter
through the same door
and separate once inside,
this is a very important detail.
It's important, because across from
the men's entrance, was my director's office.
It's still there.
The office has one window. Actually, there
are two windows, but one is important
because it has a view of the entrance.
I spent the whole day behind that window.
I just watched the girls enter.
I couldn't care less who paid and
who didn't pay the washroom fee.
The parish office went
bankrupt due to my inattention.
At one point, they didn't even
have money to buy toilet paper,
but I just continued
watching the women enter.
And God knows
I saw a lot of pretty girls
and women enter.
All women are beautiful, in my opinion.
One day,
a young lady walked in,
and when she passed by me
it was as if I got struck by lightening.
At that moment, I knew she
would be my wife one day.
I saw her for the first time in my life.
I didn't know anything
about her, but I only knew:
'Our Lady put her on my
path, she'll be mine.'
Now, I was getting even more edgy,
I felt I couldn't search for her,
nor investigate who she was
or where she came from.
I couldn’t,
because I was too busy working
from morning until night, every day.
So I had a big problem, which
I wouldn't be able to solve by myself.
In life when you have a problem which
you cannot solve by yourself,
the only thing you have is
to pray for answers.
I started to pray humbly to the
Holy Spirit, that He descends on
New Caption
Not even ten days passed
When, now deceased, Father
Ivan Bradvica came to me and said:
'Goran, you did a good
job in the washrooms,
you're getting a promotion.'
My Lady, I love you so much.
So quick
and even a promotion.
I came to the parish office and asked:
'Father what will I be doing?'
He said: 'There is a broom.
You'll broom the streets of Medujgorje.'
I would be working eight hours.
I would have lots of free time.
When I prayed,
I didn't pray for a better job,
or more money,
I prayed for free time
so that I could find out
who that girl was,
and that's what I got.
I didn't care about the job.
I would do anything,
so I immediately went around
and started to inform myself
about who this girl was,
where she came from.
There were problems
right from the start
because I discovered
that the girl
was Czech
and she didn't understand Croatian,
and she was thirteen
years younger than me.
She was a million times
more attractive than me,
and she never had a boyfriend.
She came to Medjugorje
to pray for her calling
because she wanted
to become a nun.
Well, that's what I found out,
but I knew that one day,
she would become my wife.
Imagine me,
a drug addict, alcoholic, pill
popping thief with hepatitis C,
all cut up with tattoos.
An epileptic, schizophrenic
with a bullet stuck in his head,
and
the best of all
when I smiled,
I had three teeth.
Two grey and one black
- what a beauty.
Who wouldn't want me?
What a disaster.
My friends in Medjugorje told me:
'don't get angry, man, but you're not normal,
take a look at yourself.
With your diagnoses, nobody
will ever want you.
You'll be alone for
the rest of your life.
Why are you making
problems for yourself,
you can be happy as you are now.'
But I knew she would be my wife,
I wasn't stupid
I knew it wouldn't be that simple,
so I ran after here like
a dog for nine months.
She would yell at me,
tell me that I'm ugly,
old
and boring.
She would humiliate
me in front of others,
she was mean towards me.
But, like all loyal dogs,
I followed her around.
She lived and worked
in a boarding house,
so that she could have a free
room in which she can pray for
her vocation.
I quickly became friends with
the owners of that boarding house.
I would come there
with chocolates, gifts and flowers...
When she would see me, she'd run
to her room and lock the door.
Nine months of this, and her feelings
for me didn't move a millimeter.
Nothing.
At one point it came to me.
You fool, if it's not
working, change your tactic.
I was at the boarding house;
Katarina was washing dishes.
I sat down and said to her: 'Kate,
my love, listen.
This is over.
You know that I just
returned from Germany.
Well, I met a girl there.
That girl now wishes to be with me.
I am packing my things,
and in the next few days,
I'm leaving for Hamburg.
There, I will get married with her
and make a family,
children.
and you continue washing dishes here
in Medjugorje, because you are a fool.
There's nothing I can
do for you, anymore.'
As I was speaking,
she threw the dishes
and started running to her room.
As she was running, I looked at her
and I thought to myself: 'I think there's
going to be something here.'
I stood up and left.
During those nine months
of running after Katarina,
she got to know me, what kind
of a man I was on the inside.
She started to have feelings for me,
but she was afraid of my past.
She was sad, because I was leaving
and we would never see each other again.
She didn't want us to part that way.
She wanted to talk,
open her heart to me,
talk about her feelings
and ask for forgiveness.
But she didn't know whether
it was God's will for her to do so.
So she trekked up Križevac Hill.
She climbed up there, kneeled
at the foot of the cross
and said: 'My dear Jesus,
Goran is leaving.
I'll never see him again.
I'm sad my Jesus, because you
know how I feel about Goran.
But my dear Jesus, I don't know if it
is Your will that I open my heart to him.
So let's make an agreement
to see whether it is Your will or
not for me to open my heart.
Let's agree on the following:
if Goran
comes to me tonight
and asks me this exact question:
'is there anything you'd like to tell me?'
I promise you, without any reservations,
I will consider it to be Your will for me
to open my heart to him. This will be
the only way I tell him everything I feel.
That evening, I came into a cafe for a coffee.
I turned my head, and there
was Katarina with two girlfriends.
I took a chair right near them.
I looked at her in the eyes
and the only thing I said to her, was:
'Kate,
is there anything you'd like to tell me?'.
When I asked her that question,
she began to tremble like this.
I got scared. I said:
'Man, there's always an issue
with you. I asked you a simple question.'
She was
in complete shock.
She grabbed my hand
and said: 'Please, let's go
outside. I want to talk to you.'
So we went outside
and she began:
'I am really sorry that I insulted
and humiliated you.
I know you are a good man.
I have feelings for you,
but I'm afraid of your past. Now it's
too late for us to start something,
since you're leaving for Germany.
We'll never see each other again,
you have another woman.
I wish you all the best in life.'
And she went on
and on
I was as quiet as a
priest during confession.
One hour she spoke, man,
my head was this big.
I told her: 'Are you finished yet?
You're the only one speaking.
Can I say something? Slow down,
why are you rushing?
Katarina,
wait,
I have to be honest with you.
The girl in Germany doesn't
interest me at all.
I am in love with you, and I want
to spend the rest of my life with you.
I love you, is that clear to you?'
When I said that,
she got angry,
because she was sure
I was going to Germany.
Now everything had turned around.
I'm not stupid.
While Katarina was speaking
I was quietly listening.
She opened her heart to
me and told me everything,
I knew everything now. I knew I had to win
her over and this was my only chance.
And was I very annoying, You can
imagine how relentless I was,
when finally she started crying
and said: 'You liar, you've deceived me.'
She was thinking about
it, thinking,thinking
and after a while she said:
'Let's try.
But my dear,
there's no sex,
you can't even kiss my face,
you can't even hold my hand
until the wedding,
I said: 'Great!
Let's do this!'
We were together fifteen months
and every now and then I tell her:
'Katarina, please, I'm getting old.
I want to get married.
I want a family, children.
I want to live a normal
life, like other people.
Don't you want to?
What are we waiting for?
She told me: 'Relax,
why are you rushing.
Does this mean you've been
hiding something from me?'
Fifteen months
and I had it
up to here.
That day,
I told her: 'Kate,
please sit down. Listen,
this relationship makes no sense.
This is what we're going to do,
whether you agree or not,
you have two days
to tell me
if you wish to marry me.
If you don't,
no problem,
I won't get angry.
You can go on
your merry way then,
and I'll go my way as well.
I love you,
but I will not date
you for ten years.
If you don't trust me sorry,
but that's your problem.
You have two days to tell
me yes or no and that's it.'
She was in shock.
She didn't know what to do.
On one hand, she wanted
to get married, she loved me,
but on the other hand, she had to
have me for the rest of her life,
along with my past.
Obviously, she was afraid.
Where do you think she went?
She quickly trekked up Križevac hill
and when she got to the top, she saw
a group of pilgrims from Slovakia
and she's a Czech.
Within the group there was a
priest holding a Bible under his arm.
She came to him and said:
'Can you kindly lend me your Bible?'
The priest replied to her: 'Why?'.
One lady from the
group started shouting:
'If she wants a Bible, she obviously
is seeking guidance and an
answer through the Bible!'.
The priest turned around
and asked: 'Is that true?'
Katarina answered that it was true.
New Caption
She knelt, he lifted his
arms, prayed over her,
blessed her and
gave her the Bible.
At the mountain top Cross, Katarina said:
'My Jesus. What should I do?
Goran wants to marry me,
but I'm afraid. What if he
starts to take drugs again?
What if he starts to drink?
What if he starts beating me?
I have to have him
for the rest of my life.
Jesus
I don't know if marriage is my
path, is this my calling in life.
Goran wants us to live in
Medjugorje our whole lives,
I don't know anybody here.
What will I do here?'.
These were all reasonable questions.
She prayed and prayed and prayed.
Finally with her eyes closed,
she opened the Bible
and where her eyes landed,
that's what she read
and it said:
Stay where you are,
that is your path.
don't be afraid,
I am with you.
So, it was nicely written...
marry Goran.
Very simple.
I see that you're laughing.
Simple, isn't it?
But again, there were problems
and why?
I'll tell you why
there were problems, because
Katarina is a woman.
Sorry ladies, but you always
complicate simple things.
Man, it was clearly written
right there, in black and white,
but she was still unsure.
She closed the Bible,
returned it to the priest
and started to make
her way back down.
She made ten or so steps
and she stopped
turned
and looked at the priest.
At that moment
she had remembered something.
When Katarina was
eleven and a half years old.
From the north of the Czech Republic,
she went to the south
on vacation, to her grandmother's.
One morning, she went to holy
mass with her old grandmother,
which was celebrated
by a young priest.
The mass ended.
The priest came down from
the alter and came to her and said:
'Little girl,
please kneel.
I will pray for your calling in life,
and for your life's path
and I will always be praying
for you from now on.'
Katarina kneeled, he raised
his arms and prayed over her.
From that moment on,
for the next twelve years,
she never saw that priest again.
That priest, was the same priest
on Križevac Hill, which lent her his Bible.
That was him.
It was in this moment, that she
was certain that it was God's will.
We have been in contact with that
priest for a long time ever since.
He comes here often
He comes here often with his
pilgrims, to hear my testimony.
What's also interesting,
is that the church in the south
where that priest prayed over her,
was the church of St. Jacob
June 3, 2000
Katarina and I got married
in St. Jacob's church,
but not the one in the Czech Republic,
rather the one here in Medjugorje.
We now have Lucija, eighteen years old,
Luka, fifteen,
Ana, thirteen,
Marko, nine
and little Jan is five years old.
We have five children.
Praise be and glory to God.
Nobody else.
As for my stepmother,
whom I wanted to kill twice,
how much I hated her,
paid a holy mass every month for
my salvation and conversion
during the nine years
I was living on the streets.
She never got tired.
She never lost hope.
She never stopped believing in me.
She wasn't even my mother.
All that love which I didn't give
my biological mother,
because I was stupid,
I now give to her.
My father is still alive
he's eighty-six years old.
I think he'll live longer than me.
The old guy is doing great.
My brother hasn't drank alcohol
for many years.
His wife is also deaf and mute.
They have two healthy daughters.
From the day I came to Medjugorje
I have never had an epileptic attack.
All the paranoia and fear I had
in this crazy head, have disappeared.
Now, I only fear God and my wife.
My Czech woman is as
dangerous as a wildfire,
but that's good for me.
Due to the bullet in my head, they
didn't even give me one year to live,
not one more year
On June 2nd
of last year, it was full forty-one years
since I shot that bullet into my head.
The other day my son Luka,
thought about it and said to me:
'You know Dad, you're
a really lucky guy.'
' I asked him: 'Why am I lucky?'
and he said: 'Look,
nobody can ever tell you
you have nothing in your head.'
If you wish to ask questions,
you can.
Any questions?
What do you do?
When I entered the rehab community,
Sister Elvira heard my story
and told the other guys:
'Place this new guy in
our icon painting classes
when his withdrawal period is over.'
So, today I am in essence,
an iconographer.
I've promised an icon to my
best man three years ago,
he's going to kill me because
I still haven't delivered him one,
it doesn't matter, it's all
good, you'll get it.
Like I said, she placed me
in iconography classes,
because when you
draw icons of God,
you have to be pure,
you have to pray and fast.
That was surely
one of the ways
that helped me in my spiritual
conversion and healing.
So, I am an iconographer.
However, there's a little problem,
from March to November, I have
three, four testimonies per day.
So I don't have
much time to work on
work on icons
My wife is a guide
for Czech and Slovak pilgirm groups.
So when she is with her pilgrim
groups, I take care of our kids.
What am I to do, we have five
children. I have to study with them.
When she's home, then I do
my testimonies and that's how
we survive from day to day.
Those are in essence,
our jobs.
After sweeping washrooms, I also
worked at sweeping the parish office,
here I was in charge of registering Mass
offerings from parishioners, who would
pay Masses for their deceased.
There were funny stories there as well,
but I won't burden you with them tonight.
But, people would come from Split
to pay a Mass for their deceased,
and when they saw me sitting there in
the office they would immediately run
away from the office.
Then they would go back to Split
and tell everyone that they saw me,
and that I even succeeded in
conning the friars in Medjugorje.
During a Mass once, I was doing
the Mass collection,
and one guy grabbed me by
the neck and said that I had
cheated him for
money back in Spilt.
Sorry, I've gotten off topic
After the parish office, the friars
suggested that I go work in
government office in The Center
for the fight against drugs,
which had just opened in Mostar.
There I did seminars with
the police, doctors, etc.
They took me in and I
worked there for a long time.
I went around Mostar and picked
up drug addicts off the streets.
I would take their heroin, weed,
everything they had, pills, everything.
Then I would flush it all down the toilet.
Once they called me on a Friday night,
Saturday and Sundays we didn't work,
from Caritas and told me
that they received from Italy
two bags of Heptanone and Methadone.
That's a replacement for heroin.
So I went to Mostar, and I kept the
methadone for two days
in my house
and it didn't even cross my mind
to take the drugs. That was more of a
grace, than it was my strength.
It never crossed my mind.
The only time it's hard not to drink
is when football (soccer) matches are played,
when Champions league or Croatian
National team matches are played on TV,
we are all watching in a cafe,
then I feel like drinking a beer. Everyone
is drinking beer, and I drink juice.
I can't even look at it anymore.
Then I order a coffee, then another
coffee, then I get an upset stomach.
That's the only time
I feel like drinking a beer,
but I said I wouldn’t
drink and I haven't.
I still haven't given in and I won't.
Now I'm already old.
A battle is a battle, with
everything and anything,
but the hardest battle is with yourself.
Then with your wife, your
children, your neighbors.
Every day is a battle,
every day is a conversion.
Every day I ask God
for the mercy to be
a better man.
At home, we try not only to pray
the rosary,
but to also put our prayers into deeds.
This means being good towards
other people, helping others.
Please don't take me wrong,
that I'm praising myself or something,
but it's from God, not from me.
My wife and I placed over sixty guys
and girls in the rehab center,
through dialogue.
Then when somebody comes to you
from Poland, Ireland, or from wherever,
and they thank you for saving them,
that is the joy that gives you life.
I have had it up until here,
with these witnessing.
I have no desire to
speak about it anymore.
Every day I witness three, four times.
Last year
I wasn't eating, drinking, I just
sat in front of the house and
kept repeating the same thing.
I really fell into some kind of crisis.
I kneeled in the kitchen and said:
'My Jesus, please let me know
whether these witnessing
are my mission or not.
Please, if they are not little by
little, let the people leave,
and if it is my mission,
send more.
That was the biggest mistake I made
It was the biggest mistake I ever made
If I had the strength
well, I would have
ten testimonies a day.
I'm so stupid,
If I didn't ask Jesus, I could have been
happy with one, two testimonies daily.
Now man,
it is completely out of control
To be honest, I still haven't accepted
that this is my life's mission.
I haven't accepted it, but
wherever they call me to go,
I go
I go, because when parents call
me or come to my door and say:
'My child has been going to the
rehab commune for three years.'
or 'My child got out and got married.
Thank you very much.'
That in essence gives me....
I see the fruits and that gives me
the strength to go forward.
Where has God lead you?
Where have you witnessed?
Well, I was in Dublin with Vicka.
There were about ten priests.
That was where I spoke in
front of the most people.
There were 5500 people.
I was in Dublin in 2004.
I went to the Ukraine four times.
I was in England, in Ireland
in Italy. Now I will be
going to Slovakia,
but my favorite is going to prisons.
You guys here tonight don't have prison
problems, for you it's nice to listen to me.
But when I go to prisons, to
their psychiatric wards,
I feel at home there.
I need prisoners,
I need those in psychiatry
and that's what I like most.
When I go there, I know that
there I can make a difference,
My testimony can bear fruit there.
Thank you, thank you from the heart.
I kindly ask for no one to take offence
if I offended them in any way.